Page
/
54
Page 1 of 54

KENYA INSTITUTE OF CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT

A Skilled and Ethical Society

PRIMARY SCHOOL CURRICULUM DESIGN

CREATIVE ARTS

GRADE 4

Page 2 of 54

ii

First Published 2017

Revised 2024

All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or transcribed, in any form or by any

means, electronic, mechanical, photocopy, recording or otherwise, without the prior written permission of the publisher.

ISBN: 978-9914-43-016-5

Published and printed by Kenya Institute of Curriculum Development

Page 3 of 54

ŝŝŝ

FOREWORD

The Government of Kenya (GoK) is committed to ensuring that policy objectives for Education, Training and Research meet the

aspirations of the Constitution of Kenya 2010, the Kenya Vision 2030, National Curriculum Policy 2018, the United Nations

Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) and the regional and global conventions to which Kenya is a signatory. Towards achieving

the mission of Basic Education, the Ministry of Education (MoE) has successfully and progressively rolled out the implementation

of the Competency Based Curriculum (CBC) at Pre-Primary, Primary and Junior School levels.

The Kenya Institute of Curriculum Development (KICD) reviewed the curriculum and rationalised the number of learning areas in

2024. The review and rationalisation process was informed by several factors, among them, the recommendations of the Presidential

Working Party on Education Reforms (PWPER) and reports of the continuous curriculum monitoring and evaluation activities.

The reviewed curriculum designs build on competencies attained earlier by learners. The designs prepare the learner for smooth

transition to the next level. The designs will also afford the learner opportunities for developing requisite competencies and enable

them to interact with other people and the environment around them.

The key components of the curriculum designs include the National Goals of Education, the essence statement, general and specific

learning outcomes as well as the strands and sub strands. Suggested learning experiences, key inquiry questions, core competencies,

Pertinent and Contemporary Issues (PCIs), values and assessment rubrics are also outlined in the curriculum designs.

It is expected that all Government agencies and other stakeholders in Education will use the designs to plan for the effective and

efficient implementation of the Competency Based Curriculum.

Thank you.

HON. EZEKIEL OMBAKI MACHOGU, CBS

CABINET SECRETARY,

MINISTRY OF EDUCATION

Page 4 of 54

ŝǀ

PREFACE

The Ministry of Education (MoE) rolled out the Competency Based Curriculum (CBC), nationally in 2019, following a national

convention in 2017 where the Basic Education Curriculum Framework (BECF) was adopted by stakeholders and a national pilot of

the curriculum in the Early Years of Education (EYE) in 2018. According to the UNESCO IBE requirements, a curriculum should be

reviewed every five years. So, the review of CBC was due from 2023. In view of this, the reviewed curriculum designs will enhance

the implementation of CBC since it corporates the lessons learnt from the implementation of CBC so far.

Consistent periodical review of the curriculum is also critical in the realisation of the Vision and Mission of the on-going curriculum

reforms as enshrined in the Sessional Paper No. I of 2019 whose title is: Towards Realizing Quality, Relevant and Inclusive Education

and Training for Sustainable Development in Kenya. The Sessional Paper explains the shift from a content-focused curriculum to a

focus on producing an engaged, empowered and ethical citizen.

Therefore, the reviewed curriculum designs will facilitate the inculcation of core competencies in CBC, which are identified as:

communication and collaboration, critical thinking and problem solving, creativity and imagination, citizenship, digital literacy,

learning to learn and self-efficacy.

The curriculum designs provide suggestions for interactive and differentiated learning experiences linked to the various strands and

sub strands and other aspects of the CBC. The designs also outline suggested learning resources and varied assessment techniques. It

is expected that the use of these designs will lead to enhanced learning outcomes at various levels, prepare the learner for smooth

transition to subsequent grades and make learning enjoyable.

The MoE requests all stakeholders to keep giving feedback on the curriculum designs to inform the review during the next cycle.

Thank you.

DR. BELIO R. KIPSANG, CBS

PRINCIPAL SECRETARY STATE DEPARTMENT FOR

EARLY LEARNING AND BASIC EDUCATION

MINISTRY OF EDUCATION

Page 5 of 54

ǀ

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT

The Kenya Institute of Curriculum Development (KICD) Act Number 4 of 2013 (Revised 2019) mandates the Institute to develop and

review curricula and curriculum support materials for basic and tertiary education and training. The curriculum development process is

guided by research, international best practices as well as stakeholder engagement. The Institute conceptualised the Competency Based

Curriculum (CBC) in consultation with the Ministry of Education and other stakeholders. According to the Basic Education Curriculum

Framework (KICD, 2017) the conceptualisation of CBC was informed by 21st Century learning needs, the Constitution of Kenya 2010, the

Kenya Vision 2030, the East African Community Protocol, the International Bureau of Education (IBE) Guidelines and the United Nations

Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs).

KICD is funded by the Kenya Government to discharge its mandate. The institute also receives support from development partners targeting

specific programmes. The reviewed curriculum designs were developed with the support of the World Bank through the Kenya Primary

Education Equity in Learning Programme (KPEELP) - a project coordinated by MoE. KICD wishes to most sincerely thank the Government

of Kenya, through the MoE and other development partners. More specifically, KICD appreciates the Cabinet Secretary - MoE and the

Principal Secretary – State Department of Basic Education,

Additionally, the Institute expresses gratitude to all the KICD staff members, teachers, university lecturers, MoE staff, Semi-Autonomous

Government Agencies (SAGAs) and representatives of various stakeholders; among others, for their contributions to the development of

the reviewed curriculum designs. Finally, KICD acknowledges the Chief Executive Officers of the Teachers Service Commission (TSC)

and the Kenya National Examinations Council (KNEC) as well as the KICD Council for supporting the curriculum review process.

May God bless all the individuals and respective institutions who in one way or another supported the curriculum review process. Indeed,

these designs will effectively guide the implementation of the CBC at Primary level, thereby preparing the learner to transition to the Junior

School.

Best wishes to all learners and curriculum implementers.

PROF. CHARLES O. ONG’ONDO, PhD., MBS.

DIRECTOR/CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER

KENYA INSTITUTE OF CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT

Page 6 of 54

vi

TABLE OF CONTENTS

FOREWORD ....................................................................................................................................................................................iii

PREFACE......................................................................................................................................................................................... iv

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT................................................................................................................................................................. v

NATIONAL GOALS OF EDUCATION ........................................................................................................................................vii

LESSON ALLOCATION AT UPPER PRIMARY.......................................................................................................................... ix

LEVEL LEARNING OUTCOMES FOR PRIMARY SCHOOL EDUCATION ............................................................................. x

ESSENCE STATEMENT ................................................................................................................................................................ xi

SUBJECT GENERAL LEARNING OUTCOMES.........................................................................................................................xii

SUMMARY OF STRANDS AND SUB STRANDS.....................................................................................................................xiii

STRAND 1.0 CREATING AND EXECUTING............................................................................................................................... 1

STRAND 2.0 PERFORMING AND DISPLAYING ...................................................................................................................... 14

OPTIONAL GAMES....................................................................................................................................................................... 25

STRAND 3.0 APPRECIATION IN CREATIVE ARTS ................................................................................................................ 30

APPENDIX I: COMMUNITY SERVICE LEARNING AT UPPER PRIMARY .......................................................................... 34

APPENDIX II: SUGGESTED LEARNING RESOURCES,

ASSESSMENT METHODS AND NON-FORMAL ACTIVITIES ............................................................................................... 37

Page 7 of 54

vii

NATIONAL GOALS OF EDUCATION

1. Foster nationalism, patriotism, and promote national unity

Kenya’s people belong to different communities, races and religions and should be able to live and interact as one

people. Education should enable the learner to acquire a sense of nationhood and patriotism. It should also promote

peace and mutual respect for harmonious coexistence.

2. Promote social, economic, technological and industrial needs for national development

Education should prepare the learner to play an effective and productive role in the nation.

a) Social Needs

Education should instill social and adaptive skills in the learner for effective participation in community and

national development.

b) Economic Needs

Education should prepare a learner with requisite competencies that support a modern and independent growing

economy. This should translate into high standards of living for every individual.

c) Technological and Industrial Needs

Education should provide the learner with necessary competences for technological and industrial development in

tandem with changing global trends.

3. Promote individual development and self-fulfilment

Education should provide opportunities for the learner to develop to the fullest potential. This includes development of

one’s interests, talents and character for positive contribution to the society.

4. Promote sound moral and religious values

Education should promote acquisition of national values as enshrined in the Constitution. It should be geared

towards developing a self- disciplined and ethical citizen with sound moral and religious values.

Page 8 of 54

viii

5. Promote social equity and responsibility

Education should promote social equity and responsibility. It should provide inclusive and equitable access to

quality and differentiated education; including learners with special educational needs and disabilities. Education

should also provide the learner with opportunities for shared responsibility and accountability through service

Learning.

6. Promote respect for and development of Kenya’s rich and varied cultures

Education should instil in the learner appreciation of Kenya’s rich and diverse cultural heritage. The learner should

value own and respect other people’s culture as well as embrace positive cultural practices in a dynamic society.

7. Promote international consciousness and foster positive attitudes towards other nations

Kenya is part of the interdependent network of diverse peoples and nations. Education should therefore enable the

learner to respect, appreciate and participate in the opportunities within the international community. Education

should also facilitate the learner to operate within the international community with full knowledge of the obligations,

responsibilities, rights and benefits that this membership entails.

8. Good health and environmental protection

Education should inculcate in the learner the value of physical and psychological well-being for self and others. It

should promote environmental preservation and conservation, including animal welfare for sustainable development.

Page 9 of 54

ix

LESSON ALLOCATION AT UPPER PRIMARY

S/No Learning Area Number of Lessons

1. English 5

2. Kiswahili / Kenya Sign Language 4

3. Mathematics 5

4. Religious Education 3

5. Science & Technology 4

6. Agriculture 4

7. Social Studies 3

8. Creative Arts 6

Pastoral/Religious Instruction Programme 1*

Total 35

Page 10 of 54

x

LEVEL LEARNING OUTCOMES FOR PRIMARY SCHOOL EDUCATION

By the end of Primary School Education, the learner should be able to:

a) Use verbal and or non-verbal cues to convey information in varied contexts.

b) Demonstrate mastery of number concepts to solve problems in day to day life.

c) Use appropriate social skills, moral and religious values to positively impact the society.

d) Develop individual talents and interests for self-efficacy.

e) Make informed decisions as local and global citizens of a diverse, democratic society in an interdependent world.

f) Devise innovative strategies for environmental conservation and sustainability.

g) Apply digital literacy skills for learning and enjoyment.

h) Appreciate Kenya’s rich and diverse cultural heritage for harmonious living.

Page 11 of 54

xi

ESSENCE STATEMENT

Creative Arts is an integrated learning area that consists of Art and Craft, Music and Physical Health Education. This design

provides an avenue for symbiotic relationship in the triad where learning areas mutually benefit from each other from resource

development to skill execution (inter/ multidisciplinary integration).

The learning area is organised in three strands namely; Creating and Executing, Performing and Displaying and Appreciation

in Creative Arts. The learning experiences are structured to develop learners’ creativity, and nurture functional and aesthetic

sensitivity that leads to the acquisition of transferable skills useful in other learning areas and contexts. This is supported by

Howard Gardner’s theory of multiple intelligences, which holds that each person has different ways of learning and different

intelligences they use in their daily lives. It is also anchored on Dewey’s social constructivism theory, which emphasises

experiential and participatory approaches in the learning process.

Digital literacy, as a 21st-century skill, has intentionally been embedded to enable the learner to interact, create, store and

disseminate knowledge and skills (product) using emerging technologies and trends in education. Subsequently, this curriculum

will prepare the learner to acquire the knowledge, skills and attitudes to transit to the Junior School.

Page 12 of 54

xii

SUBJECT GENERAL LEARNING OUTCOMES

By the end of the Primary School Education, the learner should be able to:

a) perform and display different Creative Arts works to promote diverse cultural knowledge and expression,

b) create artworks to share their ideas, emotions, thoughts, feelings and experiences for learning and enjoyment,

c) perform physical and health activities for enjoyment, survival and self-fulfilment,

d) apply environmental conservation values of re-use and recycle of materials for creative and improvisation purposes,

e) evaluate Creative Arts works to make meaningful connections to creating, executing, performing, display and appreciation of

art works,

f) use emerging technologies as a learning tool to explore creative ideas in the process of creating, executing, performing,

displaying and appreciation of Creative Arts’ works,

g) acquire a variety of developmentally appropriate Creative Arts experiences within the social, cultural, national and

international contexts,

h) address pertinent and contemporary issues in society through Creative Arts’ works.

Page 13 of 54

xiii

SUMMARY OF STRANDS AND SUB STRANDS

Strands Sub Strands Suggested Number of Lessons

1.0 Creating and Executing 1.1 Percussion Musical Instruments (Drawing) 17

1.2 Netball 15

1.3 Painting and Montage 15

1.4 Rhythm 15

1.5 Melody 15

2.0 Performing and Displaying 2.1 Athletics 18

2.2 Gymnastics 15

2.3 Songs 15

2.4 Photography 10

2.5 Descant Recorder 15

Optional Sub Strand

Either

2.5 Swimming

15

Or

2.5 Indigenous Kenyan Games

15

3.0 Appreciation in Creative Arts 3.1 Analysis of Creative Arts Works 15

Total Number of Lessons 180

NOTE: The number of lessons is suggested per Sub Strand may be less or more depending on the content.

Page 14 of 54

1

STRAND 1.0 CREATING AND EXECUTING

Strand Sub Strand Specific Learning Outcomes Suggested Learning Experiences Suggested Key

Inquiry

Question (s)

1.0

Creating

and

Executing

1.1 Percussion

Musical Instruments

(Drawing)

(17 lessons)

• Identifying: name,

community, method

of playing

• Parts of a

percussion,

• Classifying:

melodic, non- melodic,

• Improvised

rhythmic patterns

• Making charcoal

sticks (cutting,

trimming, burning,

cooling),

• Tonal value-smudge

technique.

By the end of the Sub Strand,

the learner should be able to:

a) identify indigenous

percussion musical

instruments from different

Kenyan communities,

b) classify indigenous

Kenyan percussion

musical instruments, as

melodic or non-melodic

c) discuss the function(s) of

parts of a percussion

musical instrument,

d) improvise rhythmic

patterns using indigenous

percussion musical

instruments,

e) make charcoal sticks for

drawing,

f) create tonal value on a

drawing of a percussion

The learner is guided to:

• watch virtual or actual

percussion musical instruments

to identify by; name, community

and method of playing,

• observe/listen to sounds of

percussion musical instruments

and classify as melodic or non- melodic,

• identify parts of a percussion

musical instrument and discuss

their function(s) in sound

production,

• practice improvising rhythmic

patterns to accompany songs

using percussion instruments,

• talk about value/ tone as an

element of art created on virtual

and actual sample pictures,

• collaboratively, collect materials

and tools to make charcoal

1. What is the

importance of

percussion

instruments

from different

communities in

Kenya?

2. How is tonal

variation

created in a

drawing?

Page 15 of 54

2

instrument using the

smudging technique,

g) appreciate indigenous

percussion instruments

from Kenyan communities

and pictures drawn.

sticks following the correct

procedure while observing

safety,

• use charcoal sticks to illustrate

how to create tone/value by

smudging technique,

• draw using charcoal sticks a

picture of one percussion

instrument and create tonal

variation by smudging

technique,

• show and talk about own and

peers’ percussion instruments

and drawings in a just and fair

manner.

Core Competencies to be developed:

• Communication and Collaboration: the learner speaks clearly and listens keenly while discussing about parts of a

percussion instrument and their roles.

• Digital literacy: the learner interacts with digital devices to source information on percussion instruments.

Page 16 of 54

3

Values:

• Social justice: the learner talks about own and others’ pictures justly.

• Responsibility: the learner cares for own and peers’ items and observes safety precautions when making charcoal sticks.

Pertinent and Contemporary Issues (PCIs):

• Social Cohesion: the learner acquires skill of working with others while making charcoal sticks in groups.

• Safety and security: the learner observes fire safety when burning charcoal sticks.

• Environmental conservation: the learner conserves the environment by carefully collecting materials for making a charcoal

sticks.

Link to other learning areas:

Social Studies: the learner exploits natural resources responsibly to make charcoal sticks.

Page 17 of 54

4

Strand Sub Strand Specific Learning

Outcomes

Suggested Learning Experiences Suggested Key Inquiry

Question (s)

1.0 Creating

and Executing

1.2

Netball

(15 lessons)

• Passes

(chest,

overhead)

• Catching

(double

handed)

• Macramé

technique

(overhand

knot)

• Macramé

By the end of the Sub

Strand, the learner should

be able to:

a) discuss the skills of

passing and catching

in Netball,

b) make a ball using

macramé technique,

c) perform the skills of

passing, and catching

in Netball,

d) appreciate Netball as

a team game for

enjoyment.

The learner is guided to:

• watch a virtual or live Netball

game and identify passes and

catching skills,

• demonstrate passing (chest and

overhead) and catching (double- handed) skills,

• collect reusable materials and

improvise balls using macramé

technique (overhand knot),

• practise passing (chest and

overhead) and catching (double- handed) skills,

• play a Mini-Netball game

applying the skills of (passing

and catching) while observing

safety,

• talk about own and others’ skills

in Netball game.

1. Why are the skills of

passing and catching

important in a Netball

game?

2. Why is it necessary to

improvise a netball?

Page 18 of 54

5

Core Competencies to be developed:

• Creativity and Imagination: The learner explores varied materials when improvising balls.

• Learning to learn: The learner watches a Netball game to learn the netball skills through demonstration and practise.

Values:

• Social justice: The learner demonstrates fairness as they take turns in practising the netball skills of shooting, catching and

passing.

• Responsibility: The learner takes the initiative to clean the working area and store the balls in an improvised storage.

• Unity: the learner works together with peers when painting, improvising a ball and performing the Netball skills of catching

and passing.

Pertinent and Contemporary Issues (PCIs):

• Resource mobilisation and utilisation: The learner collects locally available materials to improvise a netball.

• Self-esteem: The learner displays confidence in demonstrating new skills through practice and playing a Netball game.

Link to other learning areas:

Mathematics: The learner takes part in passing the Netball to a team-mate while applying ball trajectory visualisation.

Page 19 of 54

6

Strand Sub Strand Specific Learning

Outcomes

Suggested Learning

Experiences

Suggested Key

Inquiry Question(s)

1.0 Creating

and

Executing

1.3 Painting and

Montage

(15 lessons)

• Colour

classification

• Colour value

• Montage -subject

matter,

overlapping,

neatness.

By the end of the Sub

Strand, the learner

should be able to:

a) classify colours into

primary and

secondary for

painting,

b) paint a picture for

colour value

application,

c) create a montage

composition for

expression,

d) appreciate painting

and montage as

methods of making

pictures.

The learner is guided to:

• mix primary colours to

create secondary colours,

• mix white with a

secondary colour to create

light tones on a scale strip,

• mix black with a

secondary colour to create

dark tones on a scale strip

• draw a single object and

paint with emphasis on

colour value,

• observe sample montage

pictures for familiarity,

• source picture of ball

games and cut out,

• arrange and paste cut-out

pictures to make a

montage themed “ball

games” and clean the

working area,

1. How is glue for

pasting pictures

improvised?

2. Why is colour

classification

important in

painting?

Page 20 of 54

7

• show and take turns to talk

about their own and others

work.

Core Competencies to be developed:

• Communication and Collaboration: The learner works with others in groups and speaks clearly about their own and others

work.

• Creativity and Imagination: The learner makes thoughtful choices when producing a montage pictorial composition.

Values:

• Respect: The learner accommodates others’ views during critique of their own and others’ painting and montage work.

• Love: The learner takes turns to talk about their own and others work.

Pertinent and Contemporary Issues (PCIs):

Social Cohesion: The learner acquires the skill of working with others during creating a montage composition.

Link to other learning areas:

Mathematics: The learner mixes colours in correct proportions to classify as primary or secondary colours.

Page 21 of 54

8

Strand Sub Strand Specific Learning

Outcomes

Suggested Learning

Experiences

Suggested Key

Inquiry

Question (s)

1.0 Creating

and

Executing

1.4 Rhythm

(15 lessons)

• Note values: crotchet,

pair of quavers and

their rests.

• French rhythm names:

taa, ta-te.

• Note symbols: crochet,

a pair of quavers and

their rests.

• Qualities: Variation of

note values, repetition

of patterns, ending on a

long note.

• Free hand lettering

(ascenders and

descenders).

By the end of the Sub

Strand, the learner should be

able to:

a) interpret rhythmic

patterns involving the

crotchet, pair of quaver

and their rests,

b) write the French rhythm

taa and ta-te, names

using free hand lettering,

c) describe the qualities of

a good rhythmic pattern,

d) compose a rhythmic

pattern involving a

crochet, a pair of quavers

and their rests,

e) enjoy creating rhythmic

patterns.

The learner is guided to:

• listen to/sing familiar topical

songs and identify the music

notes and their rests using

their French rhythm names,

• clap the rhythm of the songs

while reciting their rhythms

using French rhythm names,

• write letters of the alphabet

in lowercase using free hand

lettering- ascenders and

descenders,

• use free hand lettering to

write French rhythm names

taa and ta-te,

• relate the French rhythm

names taa, and ta-te to

music note symbols for

crotchet and a pair of

quavers,

How can a

rhythm be

created?

Page 22 of 54

9

• practice writing the note

symbols; crotchet, a pair of

quavers and their rests on

monotone,

• discuss the techniques used

in composing rhythmic

patterns,

• write rhythmic patterns from

dictation using either French

rhythm names or note

symbols and their rests,

• compose original rhythmic

patterns and write them

using French rhythm names

and note symbols and their

rests,

• critique rhythms created by

self and peers respecting

each other’s views.

Core Competencies to be developed:

• Communication and Collaboration: The learner works with others in groups and speaks clearly during critique of own and

others’ rhythms.

• Creativity and Imagination: The learner composes original rhythmic patterns and writes them using French rhythm names,

note symbols and their rests.

Page 23 of 54

10

Values:

• Respect: The learner accommodates others’ views during critique of own and others’ original rhythmic compositions.

• Integrity: The learner creates own original rhythmic patterns.

Pertinent and Contemporary Issues (PCIs):

• Social Cohesion: The learner acquires the skill of working with others during group composition of rhythmic patterns.

• Social Justice: The learner fairly critiques rhythms created by others and self.

Link to other learning areas:

• English: The learner applies the concept of syllabic division in reciting French rhythm names of words and writing letters of

the alphabet in lowercase using free hand.

• Mathematics: The learner uses the concept of numbers when relating the value of the quaver in relation to the crotchet.

Page 24 of 54

11

Strand Sub Strand Specific Learning

Outcomes

Suggested Learning Experiences Suggested

Key Inquiry

Question (s)

1.0

Creating

and

Executing

1.5 Melody

(15 lessons)

• Sol-fa syllables: d r m

• Kodaly hand signs for

d r m

• Qualities of a melody;

use of stepwise

motion, variation of

the sol-fa syllables

and sound duration,

ending on d

• Slab and coil

technique

By the end of the Sub

Strand, the learner should

be able to:

a) identify sol-fa

syllables d r m in a

simple melody,

b) interpret hand signs

for the sol-fa syllables

d r m for pitch

discrimination,

c) state the qualities of a

good melody as a

foundation to

composition,

d) create short melodies

using the sol-fa

syllables d, r and m,

e) model clay slabs with

sol-fa syllables using

coil and slab

techniques,

The learner is guided to:

• sing familiar songs based on the sol-fa

syllables d r m, and identify the sol-fa

syllables by ear,

• listen to and identify aurally and

orally the sol-fa pitches (d r m) as

sounded on a melodic

instrument/voice,

• watch videos/demonstrations of

execution of the Kodaly hand signs

for the sol-fa syllables d, r m and

practise performing the hand signs,

• brainstorm on the qualities of a good

melody,

• apply composition techniques to

create short melodies based on the

sol-fa syllables d r m and the note

symbols; crotchet, a pair of quavers

and their rests,

• collect clay for modelling from the

local environment,

How can

interesting

melodies be

created?

Page 25 of 54

12

f) enjoy creating short

melodies and

modelling using clay.

• roll clay into slab and cut out three

rectangular pieces of three different

sizes,

• model so-lfa syllables (d r m) using

coil technique and attach on the slabs.

Core Competencies to be developed:

• Creativity and Imagination: The learner uses unique and new ideas to compose melodies and models the sol-fa syllables.

• Self-efficacy: The learner models the sol-fa syllables and composes original melodies.

Values:

• Unity: The learner works with peers when modelling, creating and performing various melodies.

• Love: The learner respects others while critiquing their performances.

Pertinent and Contemporary Issues (PCIs):

• Life skills: The learner acquires interpersonal skills through interacting with peers in groups as they model sol-fa syllables

and create melodies.

• Mentorship and peer education: The learner shares their compositions with peers who give feedback for improvement.

Link to other learning areas:

Mathematics: The learner applies the skill of sequencing of sol-fa syllables when creating simple melodies using stepwise

motion.

Page 26 of 54

13

Suggested Assessment Rubric

Level

Indicator

Exceeds Expectations Meets Expectations Approaches

Expectations

Below

Expectations

Ability to create and/or execute:

− a rhythmic pattern using an

indigenous percussion

musical instrument,

− a drawing using smudge

technique,

− passing skills in Netball

− catching skills in Netball

− a montage on ball games

− a painting using colour value

− a rhythmic pattern using

French rhythm names and

music note symbols and

rests,

− model clay slabs with sol-fa

syllables

− short melodies using the sol- fa syllables d r m

Creates and/or executes

the 9 items of Creative

Arts correctly and

aesthetically.

Creates and/or

executes the 9 items of

Creative Arts

correctly.

Creates and/or

executes the 5-8

items of Creative

Arts correctly.

Creates and/or

executes the 4

and below items

of Creative Arts

correctly.

Page 27 of 54

14

STRAND 2.0 PERFORMING AND DISPLAYING

Strand Sub Strand Specific Learning

Outcomes

Suggested Learning Experiences Suggested Key Inquiry

Question (s)

2.0

Performing

and

Displaying

2.1 Athletics

(18 lessons)

• Medium

sprint start,

• Elongated

sprint start,

• Sprinting

techniques

• Painting

By the end of the Sub

Strand, the learner should

be able to:

a) discuss the sprint starts

and sprinting

techniques in athletics,

b) perform the sprint

starts and sprinting

techniques for skill

development,

c) paint the Kenyan flag

for an athletic event,

d) recognise the value of

flying the Kenyan flag

during an athletics

event.

The learner is guided to:

• watch a virtual or live

demonstration of sprint starts

and sprinting techniques,

• demonstrate a medium and

elongated sprint start

techniques,

• demonstrate the sprinting

technique,

• sketch the Kenyan flag on a

paper/fabric,

• paint the flag observing colour

arrangement and neatness,

• attach the flag to a suitable

handle,

• practise the medium and

elongated start,

• practise sprinting technique,

• run sprint races while observing

safety and cheering each other

using the flags made.

1. Why is it important to

maintain appropriate

posture during sprints?

2. Why is the national

flag flown during a

national athletic event?

Page 28 of 54

15

Core Competencies to be developed:

• Citizenship: The learner acquires a sense of belonging to their country as they paint and fly the Kenyan flag.

• Digital literacy: The learner uses digital technology to watch a virtual demonstration of sprint starts and sprinting techniques.

Values:

• Patriotism: The learner appreciates sketching and painting the Kenyan flag.

• Love: The learner works with peers to demonstrate the techniques of starting sprints and sprinting techniques.

Pertinent and Contemporary Issues (PCIs):

• Safety and security: The learner performs sprints while observing the safety of self and others.

• Social cohesion: The learner works with peers as they play sprint games while observing safety and cheering each other using

the flags.

Link to other learning areas:

Social Studies: The learner links knowledge of Kenyan flag learnt in Social Studies as they learn colours of the flag.

Page 29 of 54

16

Strand Sub Strand Specific Learning

Outcomes

Suggested Learning

Experiences

Suggested Key Inquiry

Question (s)

2.0 Performing

and Displaying

2.2

Gymnastics

(15 lessons)

• Crab

balance

• Side roll

By the end of the Sub

Strand, the learner should

be able to;

a) explain a crab balance

and a side roll in

gymnastics,

b) perform the crab

balance for skill

acquisition,

c) execute the side roll for

skill acquisition,

d) appreciate performing

gymnastics skills for

enjoyment.

The learner is guided to:

• watch a virtual or live

performance of crab

balance and side roll,

• demonstrate the crab

balance,

• demonstrate a side roll,

• practise the crab balance

while observing safety,

• practise the side roll while

observing safety,

• combine a crab balance

into a side roll in turns,

• observe each other’s

performance and give

feedback.

How does performance of

rolls and balances improve

body health?

Core Competencies to be developed:

• Self-efficacy: The learner appreciates their unique abilities in practising the side roll and crab balance.

• Critical thinking and problem solving: The learner follows simple instructions while performing a crab balance and side roll

in gymnastics.

Page 30 of 54

17

Values:

• Love: The learner takes turn to support a peer during performance of the crab balance and side roll.

• Responsibility: The learner puts into practise the aspects of safety of self and others when performing the rolls and balances.

Pertinent and Contemporary Issues (PCIs):

• Safety: The learner observes safety of self and others as they perform the rolls and balances.

• Social cohesion: The learner works in pairs to perform the side roll and crab balance.

Link to other learning areas:

Mathematics: The learner uses number and sequence concepts in performing gymnastics.

Page 31 of 54

18

Strand Sub Strand Specific Learning

Outcomes

Suggested Learning

Experiences

Suggested Key

Inquiry

Question (s)

2.0 Performing

and Displaying

2.3 Songs

(15 lessons)

• Sacred, patriotic and

topical songs -

Accuracy in pitch,

rhythm, performance

directions: tempo,

dynamics.

• Performance

techniques and

etiquette: gestures,

facial expressions

diction.

• Kenyan Folk Songs- identifying: name,

community.

• Classifying: work,

funeral, naming,

initiation, marriage

and worship songs.

By the end of the Sub

Strand, the learner should be

able to:

a) sing different types of

songs applying

performance techniques,

b) perform the East African

Community Anthem in

unison,

c) identify types of folk

songs performed by

indigenous Kenyan

communities,

d) perform an indigenous

Kenyan folk song

applying performance

techniques,

e) value performing

indigenous songs from

different Kenyan

communities.

The learner is guided to:

• listen to and identify

different types of songs,

• sing different types of

songs with accuracy in

pitch and rhythm

adhering to performance

directions and applying

appropriate performance

techniques,

• discuss the messages of

the songs and

demonstrate how the

mood of the songs can be

expressed while singing,

• listen to a live or recorded

performance of the East

African Community

Anthem in unison, with

peers, discuss and

internalise the words of

the anthem,

What does good

singing involve?

Page 32 of 54

19

• practise singing East

African Community

Anthem in unison

observing performance

techniques and etiquette,

• watch a variety of

live/recorded folk songs

from different indigenous

Kenyan communities,

identify and classify

them,

• take a role to perform

different folk songs.

Core Competencies to be developed:

• Citizenship: The learner performs songs and folk songs drawn from different communities developing and appreciating

cultural diversity.

• Critical thinking and problem solving: The learner listens to and discusses different messages in songs.

• Communication and Collaboration: The learner sings different types of songs expressively using appropriate gestures, facial

expressions and diction to convey the message in the songs.

Values:

• Responsibility: The learner takes different roles in folk songs performance.

• Patriotism: The learner performs folk songs from diverse Kenyan communities and the East African Community Anthem.

Page 33 of 54

20

Pertinent and Contemporary Issues:

Social Cohesion: The learner performs with peers’ different types of folk songs drawn from diverse Kenyan communities

Link to other learning areas:

Indigenous Languages: The learner uses indigenous languages when singing songs drawn from different communities in

Kenya.

Page 34 of 54

21

Strand Sub Strand Specific Learning

Outcomes

Suggested Learning Experiences Suggested Key

Inquiry

Question (s)

2.0

Performing

and

Displaying

2.4 Photography

(8 lessons)

• Devices

• Elements- light and centre of

interest

By the end of the Sub

Strand, the learner should

be able to:

a) identify digital

devices for

photography,

b) discuss elements of

photography for

familiarisation,

c) take photographs

using digital devices,

d) enjoy taking

photographs using

digital devices.

The learner is guided to:

• observe virtual and actual

pictures to recognise devices for

taking photographs,

• observe sample photographs to

discuss lighting and centre of

interest,

• source and set the digital devices

for taking photographs,

• take photographs of self and

objects within the surrounding

focusing on; lighting and centre

of interest,

• select photographs with proper

lighting and centre of interest,

• show and talk about own and

others photographs and share

feedback.

Why is light

important in

photography?

Page 35 of 54

22

Core Competencies to be developed:

• Critical thinking and problem solving: The learner selects to store photographs with proper lighting and centre of interest.

Values:

• Respect: The learner listens to and appreciate peers’ views during group discussions.

• Responsibility: The learner uses and cares for the digital devices during use.

Pertinent and Contemporary Issues (PCIs)

Social Cohesion: The learner works with peers to take photos of self and objects in the surroundings.

Link to other learning areas:

• Mathematics: The learner applies mathematical concepts, such as geometry and proportion.

• Science and Technology: The learner delves into the science behind digital imaging technologies, connecting scientific

principles to the functioning of devices used in photography.

Page 36 of 54

23

Strand Sub Strand Specific Learning

Outcomes

Suggested Learning Experiences Suggested Key

Inquiry

Question (s)

2.0

Performing

and

Displaying

2.5 Descant

Recorder

(15 lessons)

• Parts: head joint,

middle joint, foot

joint, finger holes.

• Care: hygiene

measures,

handling and

storage.

• Techniques:

posture, fingering

and blowing.

By the end of the Sub

Strand, the learner should be

able to:

a) identify the parts of a

descant recorder for

familiarisation,

b) care for a descant

recorder for longevity,

c) play notes B A and G on

a descant recorder using

appropriate playing

techniques,

d) play simple melodies

based on notes B A and

G on the descant

recorder,

e) enjoy playing melodies

using the descant

recorder.

The learner is guided to:

• familiarise with the descant

recorder to identify its parts,

• brainstorm on ways of caring for a

descant recorder and its

importance,

• practise the techniques of playing

a descant recorder,

• use digital devices responsibly to

search and watch recordings/

watch live demonstrations on how

to play notes B A and G on the

descant recorder,

• play simple melodies based on B

A and G on the descant recorder

with accuracy in pitch and rhythm

applying the playing techniques,

• watch peers play melodies on the

descant recorder, critique and give

feedback to peers for

improvement.

How can a good

tone be produced

on the descant

recorder?

Page 37 of 54

24

Core Competencies to be developed:

• Digital literacy: The learner uses digital devices to search and watch how to play notes on the descant recorder.

• Learning to learn: The learner searches for and acquires skills of how to play new notes on the descant recorder.

Values:

• Respect: The learner listens to and accommodates peers’ views during discussions.

• Responsibility: The learner takes care of the descant recorder during and after use.

Pertinent and Contemporary Issues (PCIs):

• Communicable diseases: The learner prevents the spread of communicable diseases by observing hygiene measures in the

use of the descant recorder.

• Social cohesion: The learner plays the descant recorder with peers in a group.

Link to other learning areas:

Agriculture: The learner applies the concepts and knowledge learnt on prevention of communicable diseases in the use of the

descant recorder.

Page 38 of 54

25

OPTIONAL GAMES

The learner MUST cover ONE of the Sub Strands:

1. Swimming

2. Indigenous Kenyan games

Optional Sub Strand

Strand Sub Strand Specific Learning Outcomes Suggested Learning Experiences Suggested Key

Inquiry

Question (s)

2.0

Performing

and

Displaying

2.6 Swimming

(Optional)

(15 lessons)

• Water entry

• Water

games

• Floating

technique- mushroom

supine and

prone

• Gliding

By the end of the Sub Strand,

the learner should be able to:

a) recognise ways of water

entry in the swimming

pool,

b) play water games in the

swimming pool for fun,

c) float in water for skill

acquisition,

d) glide in water for water

confidence,

e) appreciate safety in and out

of the swimming pool

while playing water games.

The learner is guided to:

• visit the swimming pool for

familiarisation and water orientation,

• demonstrate water entry into the pool

• use feet first technique,

• collaboratively, engage in different

water games while observing safety,

• demonstrate floating techniques,

• practise floating technique while

observing safety,

• demonstrate gliding in water, observing

safety,

• practise gliding,

• observe each other performing the glide

and floating and provide feedback.

Why is

Swimming an

essential life

skill?

Page 39 of 54

26

Core Competencies to be developed:

• Self-efficacy: The learner builds confidence by floating in water.

• Learning to learn: The learner acquires the skills of pool entry and floating in water.

Values:

• Respect: The learner respects others' performance in floating and gliding in water.

• Responsibility: The learner observes own and others safety while performing and practising the water entry, floating and

gliding.

Pertinent and Contemporary Issues (PCIs):

• Safety and security: The learner adheres to water safety precautions while practising water entry, floating and gliding.

• Environmental awareness: The learner familiarises with the pool environment, safe use of water and pool hygiene.

Link to other learning areas:

Science and Technology: The learner develops a practical understanding of correct body posture when floating and gliding.

Page 40 of 54

27

Strand Sub Strand Specific Learning

Outcomes

Suggested Learning Experiences Suggested Key Inquiry

Question(s)

2.0

Performing

and Displaying

2.6

Indigenous

Kenyan

Games

(Optional)

(15 lessons)

Animal games

By the end of the Sub

Strand, the learner should

be able to:

a) identify types of

indigenous animal

games played in

Kenya,

b) perform different

indigenous animal

games for skill

acquisition

c) perform indigenous

animal games to a

musical rhythm for

enjoyment,

d) appreciate the role

played by animal

games for fitness and

health.

The learner is guided to:

• watch a virtual or live

demonstration of indigenous

animal game and identify the

skills observed,

• demonstrate different animal

games while observing safety,

• practice different animal games

while observing safety,

• practise different types of

animal games while combining

it with a musical rhythm.

1. How do indigenous

animal games

enhance physical

fitness?

2. Why are animal

games considered as

indigenous

activities?

Core competencies to be developed:

• Communication and Collaboration: The learner works with others in playing animal games.

• Learning to learn: The learner acquires physical fitness skills while participating in animal games.

Page 41 of 54

28

Values:

• Responsibility: The learner takes on different roles while playing animal games.

• Unity: The learner works with others while playing animal games.

Pertinent and Contemporary Issues (PCIs):

• Safety: The learner observes safety rules when playing animal games.

• Health and Fitness: The learner improves fitness when playing animal games for a healthy lifestyle.

Link to other learning areas:

• Mathematics: The learner keeps counting during animal games.

• Agriculture: The learner's knowledge of different animals is enhanced during performance of animal games.

Page 42 of 54

29

Suggested Assessment Rubric

Level

Indicator

Exceeds

Expectations

Meets

Expectations

Approaches

Expectations

Below Expectations

Ability to perform and/or

display:

- medium starts

- elongated starts

- sprinting techniques

- crab balance

- side roll

- notes B, A and G on

the descant recorder

- simple melodies

based on B A and G

on the descant

recorder

- photographs with

proper lighting and

center of interest

- different types of

songs

- water entry, gliding

and floating/

or animal games

(identifying and

performing).

Performs and/or

displays the 10 items

of Creative Arts

skilfully.

Performs and/or

displays the 10

items of Creative

Arts correctly.

Performs and/or

displays 6-9 items of

Creative Arts.

Performs and/or displays 5

or less items of Creative

Arts.

Page 43 of 54

30

STRAND 3.0 APPRECIATION IN CREATIVE ARTS

Strand Sub Strand Specific Learning

Outcomes

Suggested Learning

Experiences

Suggested

Key Inquiry

Question (s)

3.0

Appreciation

in Creative

Arts

3.1 Analysis of Creative

Arts works

(15 lessons)

• Making a portfolio

• Concept of appreciation:

appropriate behaviour,

aesthetic, skills, message

communicated, how to give

feedback, care of displayed

works,

• Kenya National Anthem;

role, values, occasions and

number of verses performed

• Components of a folk song:

- community of origin Type/

occasion,

Message,

- participants and their

roles (soloist,

instrumentalist, singers),

instruments.

By the end of the Sub

Strand, the learner

should be able to:

a) explain the concept of

appreciation in

Creative Arts,

b) make a portfolio for

presenting creative art

works,

c) analyse the Kenya

National Anthem to

foster patriotism,

d) describe a Kenyan

folk song

performance using

appropriate

terminologies,

e) participate in games

and sports within the

school for enjoyment,

The learner is guided to:

• research and brainstorm the

concept of appreciation in

Creative Arts,

• prepare a working/display

portfolio from locally

available resources,

• decorate by pasting

coloured paper/fabric,

• present artwork in the

portfolio,

• listen to/watch a

performance of the three

verses of the Kenya

National Anthem and talk

about its aspects,

• listen to or watch a live or

recorded performance of a

Kenyan folk song and

analyse the components,

What is the

importance of

analysis in

Creative Arts?

Page 44 of 54

31

f) value appreciation of

Creative Arts works

drawn from various

cultural backgrounds

• participate in Netball,

athletics, gymnastics,

swimming/animal games

for fun and for inter

class/inter school

championships,

• appreciate the performances

with focus on; teamwork,

safety for self and others.

Core Competencies to be developed:

• Citizenship: The learner gets to appreciate Kenyan music as they listen to and analyse Kenyan National Anthem and folk

songs.

• Learning to learn: The learner gets to interact with different type of Creative Arts works gaining new knowledge.

• Digital Literacy: The learner appreciates different works of art displayed through multimedia.

Values:

• Unity: The learner collaborates with others when analysing in groups the execution of sports skills.

• Respect: The learner appreciates others while analysing Creative Arts works in groups.

• Integrity: The learner observes sportsmanship during mini games.

• Patriotism: The learner develops the love for Kenya as they discuss aspects of the Kenya National Anthem.

Page 45 of 54

32

Pertinent and Contemporary Issues (PCIs):

• Health and safety: The learner participates in sports activities for enjoyment and fun.

• Social cohesion: The learner analyses in groups the execution of sports skills in inter class/inter school championships.

• Analytical and creative thinking: The learner analyses music and sports events and critiques art works.

• Cultural awareness: The learner analyses folk songs from different parts of the Kenya.

Link to other learning areas:

• Social Studies: The learner integrates with others while undertaking various tasks in groups

• English: The learner enhances their listening and speaking skills in English while discussing the music listened to.

Page 46 of 54

33

Suggested Assessment Rubric

- Level

Indicator

Exceeds Expectations Meets Expectations Approaches

Expectations

Below Expectations

Ability to display

/critique/participate in or

analyse/

− drawings,

− painting,

− photographs,

− Kenya national

Anthem,

− Kenyan folk songs

− netball,

− athletics,

− gymnastics,

− swimming/animal

games

Displays/

critiques/participates in or

analyses the 9 items in

Creative Arts in detail

and/ or skilfully

Displays/

critiques/participates in

or analyses the 9 items

in Creative Arts

correctly

Displays/

critiques/participates

in or analyses the 4-6

items in Creative Arts

Displays/

critiques/participates

in or analyses at least

1- 3 item in Creative

Arts

Page 47 of 54

34

APPENDIX I: COMMUNITY SERVICE LEARNING AT UPPER PRIMARY

At this level, the goal of the CSL activity is to provide linkages between concepts learnt in the various learning activities and the

real-life experiences. Learners begin to make connections between what they learn and the relevance to their daily life. CSL is

hosted in the Social Studies learning area. The implementation is a collaborative effort where the class teacher coordinates and

works with other subject teachers to design and implement the integrated CSL activity. Though they are teacher-guided, the

learners should progressively be given more autonomy to identify problems and come up with solutions. The safety of the learners

should also be taken into account when selecting the CSL activity. The following steps for the integrated CSL activity should be

staggered across the school terms:

Steps in carrying out the integrated CSL activity

1) Preparation

● Map out the targeted core competencies, values and specific learning area skills for the CSL activity

● Identify resources required for the activity (locally available materials)

● Stagger the activities across the term (set dates and time for the activities)

● Communicate to learners, parents/caregivers/guardians, school administration, teachers and other relevant stakeholders

in the school community

● Identify and develop assessment tools

2) Implementation of CSL Activity

● Assigning roles to learners.

● Ensure every learner actively participates in the activity

● Observe learners as they carry out the CSL activity and record feedback

Page 48 of 54

35

• Use an appropriate assessment tool to assess both the process and the product (assess learner’s work from the beginning to

the end product)

• Assess the targeted core competencies, values and subject skills.

3) Reflection on the CSL Activity

Conduct a self-evaluation session with learners on the integrated CSL activity undertaken by discussing the following:

• what went well and why

• what did not go well and why,

• what can be done differently next time

• what they have learnt.

There will be one integrated CSL activity that will be conducted annually. The thematic areas for the integrated CSL activity will

be derived from the broader categories of the PCIs and concepts from the various learning areas. Teachers are expected to vary

the themes yearly to allow learners to address different PCIs within their contexts. There should be a linkage between the skills

from the learning areas and the themes.

The integrated CSL activity will take a Whole School Approach (WSA) where the entire school community is involved (learners,

parents/caregivers/guardians, school administration, teachers). Parents/caregivers/guardians are key stakeholders in the planning

and execution of the CSL activity. Although the teacher takes the lead role in the planning and integration of the CSL activity,

learners will be expected to participate actively in the whole process.

Page 49 of 54

36

The CSL activity provides an opportunity for the development of core competencies and the nurturing of various values. The

teacher is expected to vary the core competencies and values emphasised in the activity yearly.

Assessment of the CSL Activity

Assessment of the integrated CSL activity will focus on 3 components namely: skills from various learning areas applied in

carrying out the activity, and core competencies and values demonstrated. Assessment should focus on both the process and end

product of the CSL activity. The teacher will assess learners using various tools such as an observation schedule, checklist or rating

scale or any other appropriate tool.

Page 50 of 54

37

APPENDIX II: SUGGESTED LEARNING RESOURCES, ASSESSMENT METHODS AND NON-FORMAL

ACTIVITIES

Strand Sub Strand Suggested Learning

Resources

Suggested

Assessment Tools

Suggested Non- formal Activities to

support learning

1.0 Creating and

Executing

1.1 Percussion

Instruments- Drawing

Melodic and non-melodic

Kenyan indigenous

Percussion instruments,

charcoal sticks, bottle tops,

pebbles, tins, wires, threads,

Y-sticks, gourds, wood,

rubber, manila papers,

hides/membranes, cutting

tools.

Portfolio, observation

schedule, aural/oral

questions, checklist,

rating scale, project,

display and peer

critique.

Performance in the

school choir/festivals,

Creative Arts club

activities.

1.2 Netball Digital devices, Netball

balls, open places or

marked fields, goal posts,

markers, whistle, storage,

Portfolio, project,

observation schedule,

written tests, checklist,

exit tickets, skill

progression charts,

self-assessment

worksheet

Research, watch

Netball matches,

participate in ball

games championships

in and out of school

1.3 Painting and

Montage

Drawing papers/ book,

water-based paints, brushes,

palettes, rags, picture (such

as newspapers and

drawings, magazine), glue.

Assessment rubric,

observation schedule,

portfolio, checklist,

Creative Arts club

activities, gallery visits

Page 51 of 54

38

Strand Sub Strand Suggested Learning

Resources

Suggested

Assessment Tools

Suggested Non- formal Activities to

support learning

1.4 Rhythm Percussion instruments,

Coloured pens, papers,

pencils

Portfolio, project,

observation schedule,

written tests, checklist,

exit tickets, skill

progression charts,

self-assessment

worksheet

Music festivals, School

music and cultural

festivals and events,

Music club.

1.5 Melody Melodic instrument, Clay,

rolling pins, water-based

paint, brushes, clay cutting

tools.

Aural/oral tests

Portfolio, project,

observation schedule,

written tests, checklist,

exit tickets, skill

progression charts,

self-assessment

worksheet

Music festivals, School

music and cultural

festivals and events,

Music club.

2.0 Performing and

Displaying

2.1 Athletics Athletics track, open places

or marked fields with

marked lines and lanes,

digital devices, whistle,

clapper,

Portfolio, observation

schedule, checklist,

project, exit tickets,

skill progression charts

Watch various

Athletics

championships on

digital media, join

school athletics team,

participate in

community and inter- school championships

Page 52 of 54

39

Strand Sub Strand Suggested Learning

Resources

Suggested

Assessment Tools

Suggested Non- formal Activities to

support learning

and other levels,

participate in Athletics

events and activities

2.2 Gymnastics • Repertoire of patriotic

songs,

• video clips

• charts

• mats

Observation schedule,

written tests, checklist,

exit tickets, skill

progression charts,

self-assessment

worksheet

Inter school gymnastic

championship,

gymnastic club

2.3 Songs Recordings of sacred,

patriotic and topical songs,

the Kenya National Anthem

and Kenyan folk songs,

resource person, pitching

instrument

Observation schedule,

aural and oral tests.

Music festivals, School

events, Music club,

2.4 Photography School tablets, or camera,

phone and computer,

Exhibition,

observation schedule,

portfolio, checklist,

Creative Arts club

activities, gallery visits

2.5 Descant

Recorder

Descant recorder, Baroque

fingering chart, Recorder

melodies based on B A and

G..

Aural tests,

observation schedule,

checklist, portfolio,

project, written tests,

Music club, Art club

activities

Page 53 of 54

40

Strand Sub Strand Suggested Learning

Resources

Suggested

Assessment Tools

Suggested Non- formal Activities to

support learning

checklist, self- assessment worksheet

2.6 Swimming

(Optional)

Swimming facility such as

standard pool, inflatable

pools; clothing and gear- such as swimsuits, goggles;

safety equipment- such as

life jackets, rescue tubes,

first aid kit, spine board;

swimming aids- such as

kick boards, pull buoys,

fins, swim noodles,

floatation devices; other

materials such as markers

and lanes, ropes, buoys,

digital devices

Portfolio, observation

schedule, exit tickets,

skill progression

charts, swimming

performance analysis

Participate in

swimming galas and

competitions, join

swimming clubs and

fun days

2.6 Indigenous

Kenyan Games

( Optional)

Cut and stick pictures of

animals, video clips on

animal games, Percussion

musical instruments.

Observation schedule,

checklist, rating scale.

Visit to a national

park, museums and

animal orphanage.

Page 54 of 54

41

3.0 Appreciation in

Creative Arts

3.1 Analysis of

Creative Art

works

Audio visual equipment,

display boards, display

props, mounting papers,

manila papers, masking

tapes/glue

Audio recordings of the

Kenya National Anthem

and Kenyan folk songs.

Portfolio, observation

schedule, exit tickets,

analysis, display and

critique.

Participating in

community festivals

and sporting events,

exhibitions,

participating in music

festivals, school

games, sports club, Art

club, visiting

community galleries,

music club/choir,

Singing the Kenya

National Anthem

during school

assemblies, sports

events and school

functions.

Page 51 of 54